# Health IT Feedback and Inquiry Portal: Standardized API Certification Criterion at § 170.315(g)(10)

This section contains anonymized feedback and inquiries, related to the standardized API certification criterion at (g)(10), that ONC has handled through the ONC <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/feedback">Health IT Feedback Portal</a>. The inquiries are organized by date under headers that mirror the organization of paragraphs in the Code of Federal Regulations at 45 CFR § 170.315(g)(10). A section is also included for inquiries related to (g)(10) Standardized API Test Kit in the Inferno Framework.

## Applies to Entire Criterion
### July 2022
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: Are there any (g)(10) requirements around patient data retention?

**ONC Response**: Neither the § 170.315(g)(10) "Standardized API for patient and population services" certification criterion nor the § 170.315 (b)(10) "Electronic Health Information export" criterion have any data retention requirement. However, most states have laws and regulations governing the retention of patient medical records. As such, historical data should be maintained by the organization in accordance with all applicable state laws, and once those requirements have been met, managing historical data in a consistent manner as business needs dictate. Organizations must follow all HIPAA requirements for the destruction of protected health information. And, in addition, they should review the Office of Civil Rights guidance on data destruction to ensure their policies and practices align to it.

### June 2022
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: If a Health IT Developer is providing a FHIR Server and FHIR API for patient access, but not the authorization server (e.g. OAuth 2 + OIDC) or the App registration portal, can such a solution be certified? Some organizations already have an authorization server, so providing the Patient Access API involves integrating the FHIR API with the existing authorization server. It seems from a (g)(10) perspective that demonstration or live testing must include authorization, authentication, etc. As such is it accurate to assume that each fully integrated solution comprised of multiple vendor components needs to be certified, but that some of the individual components such as a FHIR API + FHIR Server cannot be certified alone?

**ONC Response**: Health IT developers are permitted to use “<a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/relieduponsoftwareguidance.pdf">relied upon software</a>” to demonstrate compliance with certification criteria in ONC's Health IT Certification Program. Relied upon software is typically 3rd party software that is not developed by the health IT developer presenting its health IT for testing and certification. Relied upon software may be used to demonstrate compliance with a portion of an adopted certification criterion or an entire certification criterion.
A developer must present its own health IT for certification, and  may also use other software (“relied upon software”) to meet certification requirements. When a health IT developer relies upon software to demonstrate compliance with a certification criterion, such relied upon software must be included in the scope of the certification issued to the Health IT Module.

In the provided example, the health IT developer could use "relied upon software" in the form of an authorization server to fulfill authentication and authorization requirements in the § 170.315(g)(10) "Standardized API for patient and population services" criterion. However, a Health IT Module cannot be certified to the § 170.315(g)(10) "Standardized API for patient and population services" criterion without fulfilling all of its specified requirements, including authentication and authorization requirements.
For more information about "relied upon software", please see the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/relieduponsoftwareguidance.pdf">Relied Upon Software Program Guidance document</a>.

### December 2021
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: If we certify to 170.315(g)(10), does that cover all of the API requirements specified in this PDF? https://www.healthit.gov/cures/sites/default/files/cures/2020-03/APICertificationCriterion.pdf

Are there any other criteria in that PDF not covered in the (g)(10) criterion?

**ONC Response**: The requirements for the certification criterion at <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-45/subtitle-A/subchapter-D/part-170/subpart-C#p-170.315(g)(10)">45 CFR 170.315(g)(10) can be found at the electronic code of federal regulations page</a>. We also provide a Certification Companion Guide (CCG) and Test Procedure for each of the criteria under the ONC Health IT Certification Program, including a <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/test-method/standardized-api-patient-and-population-services#ccg">CCG</a> and <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/test-method/standardized-api-patient-and-population-services#test_procedure">Test Procedure</a> for 170.315(g)(10).

The (g)(10) CCG is a quick reference for the regulatory requirements of the criterion, and includes a list of clarifications organized by regulation text paragraph (e.g. clarifications that apply to Paragraph (g)(10)(i )(A), etc.). The (g)(10) CCG clarifications include clarifications that were part of preamble text from the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/05/01/2020-07419/21st-century-cures-act-interoperability-information-blocking-and-the-onc-health-it-certification">ONC Cures Act Final Rule</a> and the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/11/04/2020-24376/information-blocking-and-the-onc-health-it-certification-program-extension-of-compliance-dates-and">ONC Interim Final Rule</a>.

The (g)(10) Test Procedure specifies a list of capabilities required by Health IT Modules that need to be demonstrated by health IT developers during certification testing. These tests are implemented by the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://inferno.healthit.gov/suites/g10_certification">Inferno testing tool for (g)(10) certification testing</a>. We provide a <a target = "_blank" href = "https://inferno.healthit.gov/reference-server">(g)(10)-compliant reference server</a> which can be used for reference to understand the tests required for certification.

We have also published an <a target = "_blank" href = "https://onc-healthit.github.io/api-resource-guide/g10-criterion/">API Resource Guide</a> which can be used to help navigate the API testing criteria in the ONC Health IT Certification Program. This interactive document includes all the information from the (g)(10) CCG and additional examples and context.

### September 2021
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: Is it sufficient for Certified API Technology to include at least one method of documenting and accessing data via an API for each data class for certification to (g)(10)? We are uncertain about how to handle ambiguities in the underlying standard(s).

**ONC Response**: Health IT developers certified to the criterion at <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-45/subtitle-A/subchapter-D/part-170/subpart-C#p-170.315(g)(10)">45 CFR 170.315(g)(10)</a> are required to support standardized API access to electronic health information according to the adopted standards and implementation specifications referenced in the criterion for all applicable information (e.g. USCDI and US Core IG “mandatory” and “must support” data elements) that have been incorporated into certified EHR technology. For example, some health organizations may choose to incorporate only a portion of a HL7 CDA document received from an external setting into their clinical record; (g)(10)-certified Health IT Modules would need to support access to the portion of incorporated information via a standardized FHIR-based API. Similarly, if a patient were to supply health information that was incorporated into the clinical record, (g)(10)-certified Health IT Modules would need to support access to the incorporated patient-supplied health information via a standardized FHIR-based API.

Any missing information from historical or externally sourced records incorporated into certified EHR technology should be represented as not available according to applicable standards and implementation specifications (e.g. <a target = "_blank" href = "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU3.1.1/general-guidance.html#missing-data">US Core IG section 2.1.1.6: Missing Data</a>).

The requirements at 45 CFR 170.315(g)(10) do not currently address methods developers use to import, map, or store health information. Health IT developers should refer to the standards and implementation specifications required as part of the certification criterion to enable access to information that has been incorporated into certified EHR technology via a standardized API.

In regard to ambiguities in the underlying standard(s) that present challenges for mapping health information to HL7 FHIR and the HL7 US Core IG, ONC suggests working with the HL7 FHIR developer community to help resolve any ambiguities in this or future versions of the adopted standards.

Any missing information made available via the (g)(10) standardized API should be represented as not available according to applicable standards and implementation specifications (e.g. US Core IG section 2.1.1.6: Missing Data). 

### April 2021
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: Does the Cures Act mandate the use of FHIR for eCQM's? Also, if it is mandatory, from which performance year will this be applicable?

**ONC Response**: The 21st Century Cures Act adopts a new API certification criterion §  170.315(g)(10) Standardized API for patient and population services.  This API certification criterion requires the use of Health Level 7 (HL7®) Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR®) standard Release 4 and references several standards and implementation specifications including FHIR US Core Implementation Guide STU V3.1.1, and HL7 FHIR Bulk Data Access (Flat FHIR)(V1.0.0:STU 1).

The ONC Certification criteria for eCQMs does not require any FHIR standards. For additional information on CMS regulations, please reference CMS sources or contact CMS if you have questions about specific requirements. The CMS.gov website is a great place to start for information about the requirements of any particular CMS program that may be of interest to health care providers and those who support them with health IT solutions. For one example, the Quality Payment Program overview page (https://qpp.cms.gov/about/qpp-overview) offers links to educational resources and information how to contact CMS. Similarly, the CMS.gov Promoting Interoperability Programs page (https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms) currently indicates that Medicare and dually eligible hospitals participating in the Medicare and Medicaid Promoting Interoperability Programs may contact the QualityNet help desk for assistance.

## Paragraph (g)(10)(i)(A)
### December 2021
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: US Core 3.1.1 requires Procedure.performed. For (g)(10) certification how are we expected to accommodate cancelled or not done procedures where a date or period does not exist? 

**ONC Response**: Health IT modules certified to the Standardized API for patient and population services (45 CFR 170.315(g)(10)) must "Respond to requests for a single patient’s data according to the standard adopted in § 170.215(a)(1) and implementation specification adopted in § 170.215(a)(2), including the mandatory capabilities described in “US Core Server CapabilityStatement,” for each of the data included in the standard adopted in § 170.213. All data elements indicated as “mandatory” and “must support” by the standards and implementation specifications must be supported."

Through the ONC Health IT Certification Program, ONC implements required standards and functionalities that must be supported by certified products. In general, the Program requires the electronic standards in which available data is stored and/or shared by certified health IT but not how much data or when specific data must be recorded or shared. Certified Health IT Developers should reach out to the appropriate standards development organization (in this case HL7) when the standard is not clear.

To accommodate “cancelled or not done” procedures where a “date or period does not exist,” health IT developers should follow the <a target = "_blank" href = "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU3.1.1/general-guidance.html#missing-data">“Missing Data” section</a> of the US Core implementation guide (IG) for additional guidance. Test data used in Inferno (g)(10) certification testing can include "Missing Data" handled according to the US Core IG.

The requirements at 45 CFR 170.315(g)(10) do not currently address methods developers use to import, map, or store health information. Health IT developers should refer to the standards and implementation specifications required as part of the certification criterion to enable access to information that has been incorporated into certified EHR technology via a standardized API. Regarding your specific inquiry on missing data for the Procedure resource for use cases where the Procedure is “cancelled” or “not done” and a date or period does not exist, the adopted US Core version 3.1.1 IG provides guidance in section 2.1.1.6: Missing Data for supporting required and must support data elements that cannot be populated.

During the HL7 Connectathon, we discussed how the US Core version 3.1.1 IG does not satisfactorily address some of these Procedure use cases as described above, and observed efforts underway by HL7 to create a process in the US Core IG to better accommodate corrections to sections of prior standards (e.g. labeling certain updates as "patch" fixes). Unfortunately, we do not have a process in place to accommodate the updated conformance rules of Procedure.performed[x] in US Core 4.0.1 and later versions as a “patch” at this time, but we will monitor this effort over the next several months and provide any updates on the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/test-method/standardized-api-patient-and-population-services#ccg">(g)(10) Certification Companion Guide</a> when available.

### August 2021
**Stakeholder Inquiry**: US Core 3.1.1 requires that a server demonstrate support for the "composite OR" search for the CareTeam.status search parameter (US Core 3.1.1 CareTeam Mandatory Search Parameters). However, neither US Core, nor USCDI require that multiple CareTeam resource be supported. Can you clarify what is required here?

**ONC Response**: According to the regulation text for the 170.315(g)(10) certification criterion at 45 CFR 170.315(g)(10)(i )(A), health IT developers must demonstrate the ability of Health IT Modules to:

*"Respond to requests for a single patient’s data according to the standard adopted in § 170.215(a)(1) and implementation specification adopted in § 170.215(a)(2), including the mandatory capabilities described in 'US Core Server CapabilityStatement,' for each of the data included in the standard adopted in § 170.213."*

In <a target = "_blank" href = "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU3.1.1/StructureDefinition-us-core-careteam.html#mandatory-search-parameters">section 3.19.1.4.1</a> of the US Core Implementation Guide (v3.1.1: STU 3) (US Core IG) adopted at § 170.215(a)(2), there is a requirement for US Core IG CareTeam resources that servers "SHALL support searching using the combination of the patient and status search parameters: including support for composite OR search on status…"

Given that the “composite OR search on status” is a “SHALL” requirement, Health IT Modules must support this search functionality. However, given that there is not a requirement that multiple CareTeam.status values must be supported, we will update the Inferno testing tool to permit demonstration of the “composite OR search on status” using a minimum of one CareTeam.status value. We will issue a clarification on the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/test-method/standardized-api-patient-and-population-services#ccg">§ 170.315(g)(10) Certification Companion Guide</a>, and this update will be included in the next release of Inferno.

***

**Stakeholder Inquiry**: Can you provide guidance on how we are expected to demonstrate support for “must support” “dataAbsentReason” elements in US Core?

**ONC Response**: According to the ONC Cures Act Final Rule, Health IT Modules must “Respond to requests for a single patient’s data according to the standard adopted in § 170.215(a)(1) and implementation specification adopted in § 170.215(a)(2), including the mandatory capabilities described in “US Core Server CapabilityStatement,” for each of the data included in the standard adopted in § 170.213. All data elements indicated as “mandatory” and “must support” by the standards and implementation specifications must be supported” (<a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2020-07419/p-3457">85 FR 25945</a>).

However, for purposes of testing and certification for the ONC Health IT Certification Program, health IT developers with Health IT Modules that never provide an observation without a value do not need to demonstrate Health IT Module support for the “dataAbsentReason” elements contained in the the US Core IG profiles and FHIR Vital Sign profiles that build on the HL7 FHIR "observation", HL7 FHIR "observation-vitalsigns", or HL7 FHIR "observation-oxygensat" profiles, including "component.dataAbsentReason" elements. As a reminder, health IT developers are still required to adhere to and demonstrate Health IT Module support for the <a target = "_blank" href = "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/core/STU3.1.1/general-guidance.html#missing-data">“Missing Data” section</a> of the US Core IG.

We will issue a clarification on the <a target = "_blank" href = "https://www.healthit.gov/test-method/standardized-api-patient-and-population-services#ccg">§ 170.315(g)(10) Standardized API for patient and population services Certification Companion Guide</a> regarding this issue, and the Inferno testing tool will be updated in the next regular release, which occurs at least monthly, to accommodate this clarification.

--8<-- "includes/abbreviations.md"